readme.md, before:

# task-driven-experimentation

A template for technical work organized as tasks. Provides a common repository structure to facilitate collaboration. Use this as a starting point for benchmarks, evaluations, and reproducible experiment workflows.

> **Note:** This is a living template and is intended to be improved over time. Any feedback, suggestions, or criticism are very welcome -- please send comments to [Richard](mailto:r.schulze@uni-muenster.de).

## Getting Started on the Palma II Cluster

A [getting started guide](.template/docs/palmaII-getting-started.md) is available for users not familiar with the Palma II cluster or SLURM. It explains how to use the cluster without this template. That background is required for making efficient use of the template.

## Example Walkthrough

The repository includes an example that demonstrates how to use this template. It illustrates hierarchical configuration, container use, dependencies, and run specs. For a detailed walkthrough of how the example uses the template, see [Example Walkthrough](.template/docs/example-walkthrough.md).

## Template Reference

For a concise reference of the template's structure, conventions, and configuration, see [Template Reference](.template/docs/template-reference.md).

## Best Practices

Recommendations for assets, tasks, containers, and documentation. See [Best Practices](.template/docs/best-practices.md) for details.

## Artifact Packing

This template simplifies creating reproducibility artifacts (e.g., for paper submissions). For a step-by-step guide on gathering assets, creating scripts, and distributing mutable (GitHub) and immutable (Zenodo) versions, see [Artifact Packing](.template/docs/artifact-packing.md).

Commit message:

Add 'Tips and Tricks' section to README for practical workflow advice

readme.md, after:

# task-driven-experimentation

A template for technical work organized as tasks. Provides a common repository structure to facilitate collaboration. Use this as a starting point for benchmarks, evaluations, and reproducible experiment workflows.

> **Note:** This is a living template and is intended to be improved over time. Any feedback, suggestions, or criticism are very welcome -- please send comments to [Richard](mailto:r.schulze@uni-muenster.de).

## Getting Started on the Palma II Cluster

A [getting started guide](.template/docs/palmaII-getting-started.md) is available for users not familiar with the Palma II cluster or SLURM. It explains how to use the cluster without this template. That background is required for making efficient use of the template.

## Example Walkthrough

The repository includes an example that demonstrates how to use this template. It illustrates hierarchical configuration, container use, dependencies, and run specs. For a detailed walkthrough of how the example uses the template, see [Example Walkthrough](.template/docs/example-walkthrough.md).

## Template Reference

For a concise reference of the template's structure, conventions, and configuration, see [Template Reference](.template/docs/template-reference.md).

## Tips and Tricks

Practical advice for common workflows. See [Tips and Tricks](.template/docs/tips-and-tricks.md) for details.

## Best Practices

Recommendations for assets, tasks, containers, and documentation. See [Best Practices](.template/docs/best-practices.md) for details.

## Artifact Packing

This template simplifies creating reproducibility artifacts (e.g., for paper submissions). For a step-by-step guide on gathering assets, creating scripts, and distributing mutable (GitHub) and immutable (Zenodo) versions, see [Artifact Packing](.template/docs/artifact-packing.md).
