.template/template-reference.md, before:

# Template Reference

This template centers on `run_tasks.sh`, which executes tasks defined under `tasks/`. Tasks invoke code from `assets/`, optionally inside `containers/`, and can be submitted in parallel via `workload_managers/`.

## run_tasks.sh

Used to run tasks.

**Usage:**

```
./run_tasks.sh [OPTIONS] [KEY=VALUE ...] TASK [TASK ...]
```

**KEY=VALUE** pairs are environment overrides. They are applied once initially, then after each sourced file (`task_meta.sh`, `run_env.sh`, `run_deps.sh`), pinning overridden values so every file in the chain sees them.

**TASK** can be:

- A task directory (path to a dir containing `run.sh`)
- A parent directory (recursively finds all descendant dirs with `run.sh`)
- A wildcard (e.g. `tasks/.../*`; use `"!(pattern)"` to exclude)

Optional suffix `:RUN_SPEC` overrides the task's `RUN_SPEC` (set in `task_meta.sh`). Examples: `:local`, `:run:1:10`, `:run*` (clean only, wildcard). Without suffix: uses the task's `RUN_SPEC`; cleans all runs with `--clean`.

**Options:**

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `--dry-run` | Create manifest without running; print manifest contents to stdout |
| `--clean` | Remove output folders for specified tasks |
| `--workload-manager=SCRIPT` | Submit tasks as job array via workload manager script |
| `--job-name=NAME` | Job name for workload manager |
| `--walltime=TIME` | Walltime for workload manager (format: `days-hours:minutes:seconds`, e.g. `1-01:00:00` for 1 day, 1 hour, 0 minutes, 0 seconds) |
| `--skip-succeeded` | Skip task runs that have already succeeded (`.run_success` exists). |
| `--skip-verify-def` | Skip verification that container `.sif` matches `containers/*.def` |

**Examples:**

```bash
./run_tasks.sh tasks/build
./run_tasks.sh --dry-run tasks/experiment/MatMul
./run_tasks.sh tasks/experiment/MatMul/IS1/baseline:run:1:5
./run_tasks.sh --workload-manager=workload_managers/slurm.sh --walltime=1:00:00 tasks/experiment
./run_tasks.sh --clean tasks/experiment:run1
```

## Tasks

Tasks are defined as a tree under `tasks/`. A task is a directory containing at least `run.sh`; all other files (`task_meta.sh`, `run_env.sh`, `run_deps.sh`) are optional. Directories under `tasks/` form a hierarchy; any directory with `run.sh` is a task.

A **task** is a static definition of work. A **task run** is a concrete execution of that work. One task can have multiple task runs (e.g., repeated experiments).

| | Task | Task Run |
|---|---|---|
| Purpose | Static definition of work | Concrete execution of that work |
| Identified by | Directory containing `run.sh` | A named run within a task (e.g., `assets`, `run1`) |
| Configuration | `task_meta.sh` (hierarchical, root-to-leaf) | `run_env.sh` (hierarchical, inherits task config, adds `$RUN_ID`) |
| Execution | -- | `run.sh` (leaf-only, invokes code from `assets/`) |
| Dependencies | -- | `run_deps.sh` (hierarchical, writes `DEPENDENCIES`) |

### Task: `task_meta.sh`

`task_meta.sh` files may appear along the path from `tasks/` to a task directory and are sourced in root-to-leaf order. They define the static configuration for a task.

**Available variables** (provided by the framework):

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `$CONTAINERS` | Path to the `containers/` directory |
| `$ASSETS` | Path to the `assets/` directory |
| `$TASKS` | Path to the `tasks/` directory |
| `$WORKLOAD_MANAGERS` | Path to the `workload_managers/` directory |

**Writable variables** (read by the framework):

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `CONTAINER` | Container image (`.sif`) to use for task runs |
| `CONTAINER_DEF` | Definition file (`.def`) to validate the container against |
| `CONTAINER_GPU` | Set to `ON` if the container uses a GPU |
| `RUN_SPEC` | Default task runs to execute (overridden by the CLI `:RUN_SPEC` suffix) |
| `WORKLOAD_MANAGER` | Workload manager script to use for this task |

### Task Run: `run_env.sh`, `run_deps.sh`, `run.sh`

**`run_env.sh`** -- Hierarchical (sourced root-to-leaf, like `task_meta.sh`). Defines variables and helper functions for the run. Has all data from the `task_meta.sh` chain available. Available variables:

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `$CONTAINERS` | Path to the `containers/` directory |
| `$ASSETS` | Path to the `assets/` directory |
| `$TASKS` | Path to the `tasks/` directory |
| `$WORKLOAD_MANAGERS` | Path to the `workload_managers/` directory |
| `$RUN_ID` | Identifier of the current task run |

**`run_deps.sh`** -- Hierarchical (sourced root-to-leaf). Defines dependencies by writing `DEPENDENCIES` (array of dependency specs). Has the same data and variables available as `run_env.sh`. Each entry is a task path with an optional `:RUN_SPEC` suffix:

- `tasks/task1` -- depends on all runs of task1: every run must have `.run_success`, and at least one run must exist
- `tasks/task1:local` -- depends on the `local` run of task1
- `tasks/task1:run:1:10` -- depends on runs `run1` through `run10` of task1
- `"tasks/task1:run*"` -- depends on all runs matching `run*` (quote to prevent shell glob expansion)

A dependency is resolved if it is in the current invocation or already has a `.run_success` file on disk. If neither holds, the runner fails with an error listing the unresolved dependencies. Between stages, the runner verifies that all dependency runs have `.run_success` files before proceeding.

**`run.sh`** -- Leaf-only (one per task, required). The entry point for execution; invokes code from `assets/`. Has all data from the `task_meta.sh` and `run_env.sh` chains available.

Run folders are identified by framework marker files (`.run_script.sh`, `.run_begin`, `.run_success`, `.run_failed`, `.run_metadata`). These distinguish task output directories from task definition directories when resolving tasks.

## Assets

Assets hold the actual implementation of experiments. Structure is flexible; there is no predefined layout. Write outputs to the current working directory (which is `$RUN_FOLDER`) so the task framework manages data placement.

## Containers

Containers provide a fixed environment for running tasks and document how to build experiments. They are runtime-only: all task output is stored on the host. Use Apptainer `.def` files; build with `apptainer build <image>.sif containers/<name>.def`.

## Workload Managers

Workload manager scripts allow running tasks in parallel to reduce overall runtime. `run_tasks.sh` creates a manifest and invokes the script; the script submits one or multiple job arrays where each array element runs one task.

Several pre-defined workload manager scripts are provided in the `workload_managers/` directory. These scripts are categorized by CPU or GPU architecture and the expected runtime. The default script has no suffix; scripts with suffixes like `l`, `xl`, or `xxl` are intended for longer runtimes, while the `compact` script is suited for sequential or low-resource tasks such as compilation.

**Interface:** A workload manager script is invoked as:

```bash
./workload_managers/<script> "$MANIFEST_PATH" "$LOG_DIR"
```

**Arguments:** `$1` = manifest path, `$2` = directory for job log files

**Environment:** `REPOSITORY_ROOT` is exported. `JOB_NAME` and `WALLTIME` are exported if passed via `run_tasks.sh`.

**Contract:** The script must (1) fully parse and validate the manifest before submitting any jobs to avoid partially submitted workloads; (2) submit and ensure processing of jobs in dependency order; (3) each array element must run:

```bash
"$REPOSITORY_ROOT/run_tasks.sh" --array-manifest="$MANIFEST_PATH" --array-job-id=<JOB> --array-task-id=<INDEX>
```

where `<JOB>` is the job ID from the manifest and `<INDEX>` is the 0-based task index within that job.

**Manifest format:** Header (SKIP_VERIFY_DEF, env overrides, `---`), then job blocks: `JOB\t<N>`, `DEPENDS\t<id1>,<id2>`, and `INDEX\tRUN\tPATH` lines per task.

Commit message:

Add support for disabling tasks and force running them using --run-disabled.
- This change allows disabling temporary or abandoned tasks for example.

.template/template-reference.md, after:

# Template Reference

This template centers on `run_tasks.sh`, which executes tasks defined under `tasks/`. Tasks invoke code from `assets/`, optionally inside `containers/`, and can be submitted in parallel via `workload_managers/`.

## run_tasks.sh

Used to run tasks.

**Usage:**

```
./run_tasks.sh [OPTIONS] [KEY=VALUE ...] TASK [TASK ...]
```

**KEY=VALUE** pairs are environment overrides. They are applied once initially, then after each sourced file (`task_meta.sh`, `run_env.sh`, `run_deps.sh`), pinning overridden values so every file in the chain sees them.

**TASK** can be:

- A task directory (path to a dir containing `run.sh`)
- A parent directory (recursively finds all descendant dirs with `run.sh`)
- A wildcard (e.g. `tasks/.../*`; use `"!(pattern)"` to exclude)

Optional suffix `:RUN_SPEC` overrides the task's `RUN_SPEC` (set in `task_meta.sh`). Examples: `:local`, `:run:1:10`, `:run*` (clean only, wildcard). Without suffix: uses the task's `RUN_SPEC`; cleans all runs with `--clean`.

**Options:**

| Option | Description |
|--------|-------------|
| `--dry-run` | Create manifest without running; print manifest contents to stdout |
| `--clean` | Remove output folders for specified tasks |
| `--workload-manager=SCRIPT` | Submit tasks as job array via workload manager script |
| `--job-name=NAME` | Job name for workload manager |
| `--walltime=TIME` | Walltime for workload manager (format: `days-hours:minutes:seconds`, e.g. `1-01:00:00` for 1 day, 1 hour, 0 minutes, 0 seconds) |
| `--skip-succeeded` | Skip task runs that have already succeeded (`.run_success` exists). |
| `--skip-verify-def` | Skip verification that container `.sif` matches `containers/*.def` |
| `--run-disabled` | Run tasks even if `TASK_DISABLED` is set in `task_meta.sh` |

**Examples:**

```bash
./run_tasks.sh tasks/build
./run_tasks.sh --dry-run tasks/experiment/MatMul
./run_tasks.sh tasks/experiment/MatMul/IS1/baseline:run:1:5
./run_tasks.sh --workload-manager=workload_managers/slurm.sh --walltime=1:00:00 tasks/experiment
./run_tasks.sh --clean tasks/experiment:run1
```

## Tasks

Tasks are defined as a tree under `tasks/`. A task is a directory containing at least `run.sh`; all other files (`task_meta.sh`, `run_env.sh`, `run_deps.sh`) are optional. Directories under `tasks/` form a hierarchy; any directory with `run.sh` is a task.

A **task** is a static definition of work. A **task run** is a concrete execution of that work. One task can have multiple task runs (e.g., repeated experiments).

| | Task | Task Run |
|---|---|---|
| Purpose | Static definition of work | Concrete execution of that work |
| Identified by | Directory containing `run.sh` | A named run within a task (e.g., `assets`, `run1`) |
| Configuration | `task_meta.sh` (hierarchical, root-to-leaf) | `run_env.sh` (hierarchical, inherits task config, adds `$RUN_ID`) |
| Execution | -- | `run.sh` (leaf-only, invokes code from `assets/`) |
| Dependencies | -- | `run_deps.sh` (hierarchical, writes `DEPENDENCIES`) |

### Task: `task_meta.sh`

`task_meta.sh` files may appear along the path from `tasks/` to a task directory and are sourced in root-to-leaf order. They define the static configuration for a task.

**Available variables** (provided by the framework):

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `$CONTAINERS` | Path to the `containers/` directory |
| `$ASSETS` | Path to the `assets/` directory |
| `$TASKS` | Path to the `tasks/` directory |
| `$WORKLOAD_MANAGERS` | Path to the `workload_managers/` directory |

**Writable variables** (read by the framework):

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `CONTAINER` | Container image (`.sif`) to use for task runs |
| `CONTAINER_DEF` | Definition file (`.def`) to validate the container against |
| `CONTAINER_GPU` | Set to `ON` if the container uses a GPU |
| `RUN_SPEC` | Default task runs to execute (overridden by the CLI `:RUN_SPEC` suffix) |
| `WORKLOAD_MANAGER` | Workload manager script to use for this task |
| `TASK_DISABLED` | Set to `true` (or `1`, `yes`) to disable the task; it will be skipped unless `--run-disabled` is used |

### Task Run: `run_env.sh`, `run_deps.sh`, `run.sh`

**`run_env.sh`** -- Hierarchical (sourced root-to-leaf, like `task_meta.sh`). Defines variables and helper functions for the run. Has all data from the `task_meta.sh` chain available. Available variables:

| Variable | Description |
|----------|-------------|
| `$CONTAINERS` | Path to the `containers/` directory |
| `$ASSETS` | Path to the `assets/` directory |
| `$TASKS` | Path to the `tasks/` directory |
| `$WORKLOAD_MANAGERS` | Path to the `workload_managers/` directory |
| `$RUN_ID` | Identifier of the current task run |

**`run_deps.sh`** -- Hierarchical (sourced root-to-leaf). Defines dependencies by writing `DEPENDENCIES` (array of dependency specs). Has the same data and variables available as `run_env.sh`. Each entry is a task path with an optional `:RUN_SPEC` suffix:

- `tasks/task1` -- depends on all runs of task1: every run must have `.run_success`, and at least one run must exist
- `tasks/task1:local` -- depends on the `local` run of task1
- `tasks/task1:run:1:10` -- depends on runs `run1` through `run10` of task1
- `"tasks/task1:run*"` -- depends on all runs matching `run*` (quote to prevent shell glob expansion)

A dependency is resolved if it is in the current invocation or already has a `.run_success` file on disk. If neither holds, the runner fails with an error listing the unresolved dependencies. Between stages, the runner verifies that all dependency runs have `.run_success` files before proceeding.

**`run.sh`** -- Leaf-only (one per task, required). The entry point for execution; invokes code from `assets/`. Has all data from the `task_meta.sh` and `run_env.sh` chains available.

Run folders are identified by framework marker files (`.run_script.sh`, `.run_begin`, `.run_success`, `.run_failed`, `.run_metadata`). These distinguish task output directories from task definition directories when resolving tasks.

## Assets

Assets hold the actual implementation of experiments. Structure is flexible; there is no predefined layout. Write outputs to the current working directory (which is `$RUN_FOLDER`) so the task framework manages data placement.

## Containers

Containers provide a fixed environment for running tasks and document how to build experiments. They are runtime-only: all task output is stored on the host. Use Apptainer `.def` files; build with `apptainer build <image>.sif containers/<name>.def`.

## Workload Managers

Workload manager scripts allow running tasks in parallel to reduce overall runtime. `run_tasks.sh` creates a manifest and invokes the script; the script submits one or multiple job arrays where each array element runs one task.

Several pre-defined workload manager scripts are provided in the `workload_managers/` directory. These scripts are categorized by CPU or GPU architecture and the expected runtime. The default script has no suffix; scripts with suffixes like `l`, `xl`, or `xxl` are intended for longer runtimes, while the `compact` script is suited for sequential or low-resource tasks such as compilation.

**Interface:** A workload manager script is invoked as:

```bash
./workload_managers/<script> "$MANIFEST_PATH" "$LOG_DIR"
```

**Arguments:** `$1` = manifest path, `$2` = directory for job log files

**Environment:** `REPOSITORY_ROOT` is exported. `JOB_NAME` and `WALLTIME` are exported if passed via `run_tasks.sh`.

**Contract:** The script must (1) fully parse and validate the manifest before submitting any jobs to avoid partially submitted workloads; (2) submit and ensure processing of jobs in dependency order; (3) each array element must run:

```bash
"$REPOSITORY_ROOT/run_tasks.sh" --array-manifest="$MANIFEST_PATH" --array-job-id=<JOB> --array-task-id=<INDEX>
```

where `<JOB>` is the job ID from the manifest and `<INDEX>` is the 0-based task index within that job.

**Manifest format:** Header (SKIP_VERIFY_DEF, env overrides, `---`), then job blocks: `JOB\t<N>`, `DEPENDS\t<id1>,<id2>`, and `INDEX\tRUN\tPATH` lines per task.
